you know I knew coming into the night
you know I just didn't want to play bad
you know so I had to kind of focus on
the game and the start of the game was
horrendous I had to settle
down um but I had a little bit of little
bit of nerves little bit of nerves and
uh um once the game got going a little
bit and then I was able to settle
down thank
you Kobe over here um you've been you've
talked about storytelling a lot this
year and what you're going to do is is
this the perfect ending for your story
and how how do you encapsulate this
season and tonight I mean the perfect
ending would have been a championship
you know that's perfect ending to me you
know but you know tonight was you know
trying to go out um playing hard and try
to put on the show as much as I possibly
could and uh you it felt felt good to be
able to do that one last
time Kobe uh want to ask you one two
questions first of all would you accept
a script like this for your new story
company would you accept reject a script
like this yeah after debates in the
story room of why winning a championship
is not in the question then yes I would
have accepted this
one but but my serious question is what
does it mean to you we know what a
competitor you are we've talked about
that for 20 years we've seen that in you
when you come through with a performance
like this which is what you wanted to do
what does it mean to you to be able to
to call on your your your The Still The
Still The abilities that you have to
come through and look like your old self
to some degree um you honestly I I still
I mean I can't believe this actually
happened to be honest with you like I
don't this is it's kind of crazy to me
like I still don't it's hard to believe
that it happened this way really is like
I'm still in shock about it and and just
you know the uh the outpouring of
support all night long and my you know
for my teammates and the fans and my
family and it was
just you know it's unbel unable man
unbelievable like I'm still in shock
about it and I think now I allow myself
to go back and read a lot of the things
and watch some of the commentary and the
videos and just kind of take it all in
you know
[Music]
Serena Kobe from from the energy and the
crowd to all the tribute videos playing
everywhere to your former teammates
being there and celebrities what do you
think that that one thing you're going
to remember most when you're sitting up
there right now that you won't take
away I think uh um the fans
reaction from the fans you know the the
chanting you know the support the
encouragement I mean I was really really
tired um it was just like I you know
there's just no way I got to continue to
push it because the you know the fan
support was tremendous and uh you I
think that's that's the thing I remember
the most you
know Kobe you said before the game that
tomorrow you planning on working out and
and then going to work uh with your
company your business is that still the
plan based on how your body feels right
now I have to I have to that's a very
slippery slope me I've done my research
for players
post and and it's kind of like the you
know tomorrow tomorrow tomorrow and then
all of a sudden it's h
oh so I think the important thing is to
get into a routine to maintain
discipline and to find a new routine you
know I've been in a certain routine for
my entire career and I think the the
worst thing that I could possibly do is
not have one um because then you wake up
without a sense of purpose or a sense of
direction so you I have to find a new
routine and I have to get to it and be
comfortable with
it Kobe you uh Kobe you talked earlier
about trying to keep this day as normal
as you can how did this day leading up
to it wind up turning out didn't work
out that
way didn't work out that way in in in a
good way I mean there there was so many
people to talk to and um items to be
signed and you know pictures to be taken
and and you know I I just you know I
just gave myself up to that because I
said this is just this is this is fine
this is cool man just let it go just let
it ride just enjoy it and and it was uh
it was
fun no no no
Kobe at what moment were you most
emotional tonight when did it really
take you over oh hey
um there were a lot of points there
where I started getting uh emotional you
know when we first ran out of the tunnel
and which you you you catch it like you
I catch myself you know like okay I'm
putting on my jersey I'm saying okay
this is the last time we going to put on
a Jersey right you know what I mean and
then this the last time I run out of
tunnel you know and like when those
moments happen you you catch yourself
and you start getting really emotional
and then I say okay you got to block
that out because that none of that makes
a difference whatsoever if you've come
out here and completely lay an egg
you'll completely mess up the situation
so you have to concentrate and focus and
then you can be nostalgic all you want
you know later on tonight and then
tomorrow all right so Kobe Bill hold on
Rachel bill then Rachel sorry uh two
questions one what did it mean to you or
how did it hit you when you heard co uh
when you heard magic say that you're the
greatest to wear the purple and gold and
two how closely were you watching the
tribute videos as they poured in and and
which ones jumped out of you I I refuse
to believe it cuz magic is my hero like
you know I don't think you guys truly
understand how much of a DI hard fan I
was like a Laker fan like dude was like
you know magic was all over my wall you
know I used to wear really big knee pads
because magic were really big knee pads
you know what I mean I used to practice
the baby hook like and so um he is and
always will be number one for me always
always and the tribute videos you I was
able to peek up and look and check them
out you know from time to time and um I
I I enjoyed the mall man it was uh you
know hopefully you know I'll get a
chance to uh at some point go back and
just look at them all and just kind of
take it all in you know so Kobe I know
that there was d d the jersey and the
tunnel and all of that you BL it out for
the game the game ends you give your
speech when you walk off the court for
the last time as a player what's going
through your head in those five seconds
don't
trip no I mean it was just um it's
surreal it's it's hard to describe I
mean it's it's almost like you're in a
fog and um you know everything is moving
extremely slow yet extremely fast and
you I'm trying to look and like take it
all in and you're trying to observe you
know not quite sure where to look and
just trying to take it all in and
um it's very difficult to do um but I I
I mean it's just like a dream Just a
Dream yeah absolutely absolutely you
know you know the coolest thing is that
my kids actually saw me play like I used
to play you know what I mean it was like
like whoa Dad I said yeah I used to do
this pretty often they were like really
like dude YouTube it you know what I
mean so it was pretty cool for them to
to actually see that So Co can can you
take a step back and listen to the 60s
sing can you can you just take a step
back now and just I I can I mean I'm I'm
doing it now I just can't I can't can't
believe this happened like I can't even
this is crazy to me man it's crazy to me
it's crazy and I can what me there's no
way I could possibly imagine this
happening and um just deeply honored by
the fans and you know to be able to
put on that type of show for them for
them and um because of all the support
that they've given me and and um you
know how we grew up together and the
fans have been coming here from day one
and so to give them this type of show on
the last one is you know it means
everything Kobe as the points are are
mounting quickly 20 and 30 and 40 the
fans are whooping it up what are you and
your teammates saying to each other we
could see the
Smiles um my teammates were uh were
just continuing to encourage me and
continuing to say dude shoot shoot shoot
shoot I was just
like it's like reverse you know it's a
weird year you know what I mean like go
from being the villain to now being some
type of a hero and then go from
everybody saying pass the ball to shoot
the ball it's like really strange um but
uh I I I enjoy I enjoyed it man were
very encouraging continuing to feed me
and set pcks for me and stuff and just
felt like a sense of responsibility to
continue to play I mean there are times
where I drove to the basket dude BR my
legs were just like what are you nuts
and I just throw the ball up and it goes
in I was like oh thank
God you know
magic uh
um two quick ones on your left uh in
your new commercial you're encouraging
everyone to to sing their hatred of you
throughout your career how how vital was
the hate to to drive you to to what you
did is extremely necessary for me
because that's what um um that's what I
fed off of and I think at that time um
you know to be embraced um would have
been like Kryptonite for me you know cuz
that the the the darkness still those
dark emotions is what I used to drive me
you know that isolation and that's what
I grew up comfortable in so I would
refuse to allow anything else but that I
mean even saying things that
create some type of
animosity you know what I mean to just
continue to use that as fuel to propel
me forward I mean it was extremely
extremely necessary if you wanted to
beat me all you had to do is embrace me
at that time and I would have been
done the flip side of that tonight was
everyone coming together former
teammates I mean I don't know if you saw
what was outside the people massing
outside so uh what was it like and how
did it feel to be at the the center of
of this unifying moment it's
surreal it really is and you know I
think what I tried to do is not think
about it you I tried
to try to go through my routine as
normal as possible and and think about
the craft think about the game you know
who are you matching up with you know
how is how's the defense going to play
you like try to go back to the basics
not think too much about the bigness of
the moment you know just focus on those
those
details Kobe okay um over here back
here hi what's up what's up um you you
you alluded to this after off of Jay's
question just about embracing kind of
the villain role to hate all this a lot
of people were so used to seeing only
that ferocious competitive killer kobe
that this year as you've kind of let
your guard down and this brighter kind
of demeanor has come out people have
kind of like kind of wondered and I've
even heard people debate so is that is
that the real Kobe where's the real Kobe
what is this like the public side of
this for you been about in terms of kind
of letting go a little bit um being able
to be kind of more of this this you know
joyous Persona publicly as opposed to
the the the killer kind of persona that
you were uh carrying for so long I mean
I'm
both I'm both just like everybody in
this room you know it's a it's a very
simple concept when you think about it
we're all both we all have a little hero
and villain inside of us man and you
know it's just you know depending on
perspective um
one day we were driving back from school
with my kids we were having a conver you
know conversation about villains and
movies and you know I think we were
talking about Voldemort or something and
they asked me and said well what makes a
villain a villain and I was like oh is
this like one of those daddy moments
where you can't mess this up sort of
thing you know and and I thought I said
you know um um me and my kids were all
allergic to
bees and so I asked I said you know if a
bee is flying around your head you know
what are you going to do she well I'm
going to take a magazine I'm going to
roll it I'm going to try to knock it out
the air I said okay well to you is to be
the hero or the villain she the villain
I said what about the be that's flying
around minding its own business is it
the hero or the villain are you the hero
and she goes well I would be the villain
I said well exactly it's all a matter of
perspective right so that's the simple
way to describe that I think we all are
both it depends what perspective you're
looking at it from Kobe two questions
first if you try to summarize what
happened tonight will be like this Kobe
retired and Steph Cur the Golden State
to create the new history how do you see
this change of Time how do you think of
the league that will be without I think
this has been an amazing day for sports
fans basketball fans in particular it's
been a great day with them setting such
a unbelievable record I mean you think
about that mean 73 wins I mean that's
that's ridiculous and uh and then
obviously what happened here tonight I
mean it's it's been a it's been a great
night in basketball history I think
second question um do you have a
something to say to your friends in the
other side of the world you know
billions millions of people didn't go to
work to see your games in China yeah ni
and I'll see you soon yeah see you soon
thanks Ted Co how would you describe
driving up here today and seeing what
was going on around this area just for
you and at the same time how emotionally
draining was that part of the entire day
and be able to dig deep like you did and
come up with a big S so um you know
seeing everything that was taking place
before and just you know I I I was
enjoying it I was very appreciative of
it and then I quickly you know get right
back to my center of okay you got to go
out there and
perform and so I was able to focus and
uh and try not to get too emotional
because I feel like that would take away
from the performance you know even
despite my best efforts you can still
she had to started a game you know was
still nervous and still emotional about
it and had to settle down um
soing pretty good in the third quarter I
was tired man I was tired but you got to
push through it I mean this is you know
saving it for what you know I was just
hoping I didn't hurt
something that would be a buzz
kill go right here uh I've asked you
this question before under very
different circumstances and you didn't
like the question then uh is this give
it a shot again is this the last time
officially is this the last time that we
see Kobe Bryan play basketball
well I mean you know now with like you
know with Twitter and Instagram and all
other other stuff you might catch a
glimpse of me shooting at a gym or
something at a playround or something
like that I mean that's it's about
it oh yeah yeah yeah yeah I feel great I
me I feel I'm extremely um happy this is
like a very you know joyful day um to be
able to have this experience and have
this moment um but y'all will never play
an NBA game again I know a lot of people
say yeah Never Say Never
Never H Kobe thank you very much first
of all on beh my organization and all
Turkish fans and all other
internationalist fans all over the world
when you enter the local room for the
last time after senior jersey number 24
what kind of emotions came to your mind
uh that's what I thought I was like man
this is really happening this is really
happening and um like I have those
moments all day today where um you know
the memories come in and you know I
putting on my jersey putting on my socks
putting on my sneakers like this is the
last time you're going through this you
know and then having to okay I still got
to go out there and play you know um but
those moments um we're all we're there
throughout the entire day entire day you
know preparing for the game at home
icing the ankles icing the knees iceing
the shoulder getting dressed right
coming like all of that stuff um going
through for the last time Kobe um over
when you play for 20 years you know
there are lots of different phases and
sort of chapters that people can look at
and hang on to and call their favorites
or the most interesting when you kind of
go back through your career are what are
the parts that stick out to you whether
is you know most most challenging most
interesting most pure that type of thing
um personally I think the uh you know
these the three seasons in a row of
having season ending
injuries that that
was you like after the Achilles was like
okay that was my one major major injury
you I can I can come back from this one
um people say I can't but I will and I
came back and I'm kind of working myself
back into it and stuff and then fracture
the
knee all right here we go right and
trying to do that and then tear the
shoulder like you got to be kidding you
know and so to try to climb up that
mountain and get knocked down three
years in a row man then then to try to
bounce back again from that um I'm just
happy to be able to sit here healthy and
have him finished the season but those
those three years are the thing that I
think sticks the most to me because
internally that was the most
challenging stuff we saw tonight was
stuff was almost like you were
transported back against the Celtics in
2010 you know did did you at any point
forget where you were and think
in your mind that you were somewhere
else yes and that that's and that was
the beauty of it it it's kind of like an
inner struggle right because you want to
try to appreciate the moment and uh but
to appreciate the moment you must know
where you are and when you appreciate
and know where you are it takes you out
of your Zone it takes you out of your
Rhythm so it was a constant dance so
what you saw tonight you saw okay hit
three four five shots in a row and it's
oh man this is I can't believe this is
happening oh missed the next five and
then you try to settles yourself back in
right so it's a constant dance of trying
to just accept the moment versus just
trying to digest the
moment Co okay do you do you feel like
you'll ever find I still have not
figured out how to figure out where the
questions are coming from after all
these years I'm I'm like ducking down
too um I seriously I can't I can never
see you super short um Vic's Hat's over
there now now I can spot Vic a mile away
man now that was one of the guys I'll
never have trouble finding oh do do you
think that you'll ever find anything
that you're as good at and as passionate
at as basketball passionate absolutely
listen I love The Art of Storytelling I
it's hard for people to understand it
but I I mean I do this every day all day
I me I was at the office today from 800
to 2: you know I love it I absolutely
love it while I be as good at it I don't
know but I'm going to leave no stone
unturn in the artst storytelling just
like I have my entire basketball career
that I will promise you
[Music]
Kobe given how the last three seasons
have gone um what does it mean to you to
be able to walk off the court on your
own two feet I mean aside from playing
well and were there any times this year
given how you were feeling that you
thought you know I might have make it to
that Finish
Line yeah yeah plenty of those times and
uh it is a great sense of accomplishment
to be able to close the season out
healthy and not only healthy but feeling
strong you know um but there is a time
there I think it was after the Dallas
game where earlier in the season where
it was just horrendous I didn't make
anything and I was just thinking like
how's this possible I know how much work
I put in in the summertime how mean is
this maybe this is father is just this
is just what happens you know and having
it that was a very very tough moment for
me cuz I didn't know if I could pull
myself up and then I decided you know
what to help with this thing you're
going to have to figure it out have to
figure it out and I continued to
struggle like a month and a half after
that it was just like
yeah what else are you going to do you
just got to keep going but that was the
moment where it was just like I don't
know if I can do this
thing
Darren Kobe they virtually uh sold the
place out in merchandise what does that
say to you
you uh well I mean it says that the fans
are you know really appreciative of this
moment and uh want to have something
that they maybe can remember this night
by I would think
[Music]
gracias
Kobe I know yes I got it you got it
right here knowing how much winning
means to you and how much this franchise
means to you now that they kind of pivot
to whatever happens next what do those
young guys that you play with need to do
to get this franchise back up and what
are your expectations for how this
franchise will rebuild well what I told
them in the lock room after the game is
the most important thing here in this
offseason for them to really work
together right you know it's easy in
summertime for them to break apart but I
think it's really important for the
younger guys you know D'Angelo you know
Jordan you know Randall to continue to
stay in touch and to work together and
continue to figure out together you know
where do you like the ball you know this
Rhythm this Rhythm watch film together
you know because they have to build this
thing as a unit and you know that was my
message to them and secondly you got to
be in the gym all day I mean this is not
you know I said um the reason I can
stand here in front of you guys and feel
extremely comfortable with my decision
is because I man I gave my soul to this
game man there's nothing more I could
give nothing and I said if you guys feel
like that at the end of your career you
will be just as comfortable as I am but
I'm telling you it goes by fast and if
you don't give it your all you're going
to regret it you're absolutely going to
regret it and uh don't be that guy you
know get yourself in the gym work as
hard as you possibly can and um and
hopefully they got the
message Kobe it seems
like you'll always be a part of this
Laker family will we see you back here
working with some of the younger guys
maybe from time to time or being a part
of things y'all won't see me doing it
but I'll be doing it
though and time they when they drive out
to Orange County that they're more than
welcome they're more than welcome you
know um but yeah and now I'll be working
with with the guys and you know talking
to them and you know other players
around the league
too um I just I love the game and I love
to share um the knowledge that I've
accumulated and um the knowledge that's
been passed down to me from the great
players that came before so
I'll definitely be sharing that in Arch
County though time for two more guys
and important
fans
[Music]
Michael Jordan Magic Johnson El J Jerry
West Bill Russell
[Music]
graas
NBA
last two Bill and then Serena we rarely
see you wear your jersey in here youd
want to take it off do
you um yeah let's go with
that no I just figured you know tonight
I like I I I come in here early I know
you guys got deadlines and stuff and and
it's and it's not like it's not like I
have to I what takes a long time is that
I have to ice I have to stretch I have
to do more
what am I doing that for the treadmill
tomorrow you know what I mean so you
know I'm able to come in here a lot
faster and get going um I want to walk
in the locker room they sprayed me with
champagne and I was kind of like what
the that's only for championships but
all right so I'm smelling a little bit
like champagne um but uh on a serious
note you're right you're right keeping
this jersey on and taking it off it's uh
it's going to be very very strange
man strange
Kobe you uh perfectly led me to my next
question I was I was walking around the
Arena tonight and I must have heard at
least a half dozen people saying oh my
God this feels like game seven and and
you've said so many times that game
seven 2010 was your favorite
Championship how did the energy in the
arena compare to that game seven and how
is the championship feeling different
than this kind of feeling of finality
right now well game seven the energy in
game seven was high energy but it was a
very nervous energy it was very intense
it was like you know you the fans wanted
to explode but they didn't know if they
could if they should it was like cuz
everybody's just kind of on pins and
it's like watching a scary movie you're
just kind of sitting there you don't
want to really move because you don't
want to jinx the situ you know what I
mean it's just kind of like that's the
energy of the game of game seven until
we finally won it and a place erupt it
tonight it was it was it was more
festive you know there there wasn't the
pressure it was more just a
celebration and um so that energy is
completely different but still both
intense just just different forms of
intensity thanks very much everyone guys
I thank you seriously thank you I mean I
I've you know liked most of you guys
from my career I've hated some of you
guys from my career but then come to
actually appreciate everything that you
guys do and you know truly truly thank
you so much for all of these years I
couldn't you know a lot of things that
you guys have written have inspired me
have pushed me and uh have have helped
me make have made me the player that I
am today and I don't think you guys
truly understand the impact that you
have on players and the things that you
guys right good and bad and um you know
um you guys can help Inspire and shape
the future generation of NBA basketball
players and sports industry as a whole
because you know the words are a very
powerful thing and uh so I just really
want to thank you guys for everything
that you've done for me and continue to
do for the game so appreciate it thank
you